Adds pipfile and pipfile.lock (#633)
Clinical-Genomics/cg: CONTRIBUTING.md

# Contributing to CG

:+1::tada: First off, thanks for taking the time to contribute! :tada::+1:

This is a guide for contributing to the CG package. Please check here first if you want to [set up an environment and develop](#local-development), [open and issue](#reporting-bugs), [suggest an enhancement](#suggesting-enhancements), [open a pull request](#pull-requests) etc.

#### Table Of Contents

[Code of Conduct](#code-of-conduct)

[Branch Model](#branch-model)

[How Can I Contribute?](#how-can-i-contribute)
  * [Reporting Bugs](#reporting-bugs)
  * [Suggesting Enhancements](#suggesting-enhancements)
  * [Your First Code Contribution](#your-first-code-contribution)
  * [Pull Requests](#pull-requests)

[Styleguides](#styleguides)
  * [Git Commit Messages](#git-commit-messages)
  * [Python style guide](#python-styleguide)
  * [Documentation Styleguide](#documentation-styleguide)

[CG Design decisions](#design-decisions)
  * [apps](#apps)
  * [CLI](#cli)
  * [meta](#meta)
  * [server](#sever)
  * [store](#store)

## Code of Conduct

> Communicating around code can be a sensitive thing so please do your best to keep a positive tone. Remember that people are putting significant amount of work behind a PR or a review, stay humble :star:.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Communicating around code can be a sensitive thing so please do your best to keep a positive tone. Remember that people are putting significant amount of work behind a PR or a review, stay humble :star:
```
Remove the dot after icon when the icon ends the sentence and the sentence ends the section, ditto all occurrences

Author: Fixed that

> ## Branch model

Reviewer 2: I noticed you have new words starting upper case:

```suggestion
## Branch Model
```

> Cg is using github flow branching model as described in our [development manual][development-branch-model].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CG is using github flow branching model as described in our [development manual][development-branch-model].
```

## How Can I Contribute?

### Reporting Bugs

> This section guides you through submitting a bug report for CG. Following these guidelines helps other developers and contributors understand your report :pencil:, reproduce the behavior :computer: :computer:, and find related reports :mag_right:.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section guides you through submitting a bug report to CG. Following these guidelines helps other developers and contributors understand your report :pencil:, reproduce the behavior :computer: :computer:, and find related issues and reports :mag_right:.
```

> Before creating bug reports, please try to search the issues (opened and closed) if the problem has been described before, as you might find out that you don't need to create one. When you are creating a bug report, please [include as many details as possible](#how-do-i-submit-a-good-bug-report).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before creating bug reports, please try to search the issues (opened and closed) if the problem has been described before, there might be no reason to create one. When creating a bug report, please [include as many details as possible](#how-do-i-submit-a-good-bug-report).
```

> > **Note:** If you find a **Closed** issue that seems like it is the same thing that you're experiencing, open a new issue and include a link to the original issue in the body of your new one.

Reviewer 2: So one shouldn't reopen a closed and resolved reoccurring issue?

Author: I like this way of doing it. A closed issue can include lot's of stuff that is not relevant for the new situation

#### How Do I Submit A (Good) Bug Report?

Bugs are tracked as [GitHub issues](https://guides.github.com/features/issues/).

Explain the problem and include additional details to help maintainers reproduce the problem:

* **Use a clear and descriptive title** for the issue to identify the problem.
* **Describe the exact steps which reproduce the problem** in as many details as possible. For example, start by explaining where CG was run and how it was used, e.g. which command exactly you used in the terminal.

> * **Provide specific examples to demonstrate the steps**. Include links to files or case ids, or copy/pasteable snippets, which you use in those examples. If you're providing snippets in the issue, use [Markdown code blocks](https://help.github.com/articles/markdown-basics/#multiple-lines).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Provide specific examples to demonstrate the steps**. Include links to files or case IDs, or copy/pasteable snippets, which you use in those examples. If you're providing snippets in the issue, use [Markdown code blocks](https://help.github.com/articles/markdown-basics/#multiple-lines).
```

### Suggesting Enhancements

This section guides you through submitting an enhancement suggestion for CG, including completely new features and minor improvements to existing functionality. Following these guidelines helps maintainers and the community understand your suggestion :pencil: and find related suggestions :mag_right:.

#### How Do I Submit A (Good) Enhancement Suggestion?

Enhancement suggestions are tracked as [GitHub issues](https://guides.github.com/features/issues/). To suggest an enhancement create an issue on that repository and provide the following information:

* **Use a clear and descriptive title** for the issue to identify the suggestion.
* **Provide a step-by-step description of the suggested enhancement** in as many details as possible.
* **Provide specific examples to demonstrate the steps**. Include copy/pasteable snippets which you use in those examples, as [Markdown code blocks](https://help.github.com/articles/markdown-basics/#multiple-lines).
* **Describe the current behavior** and **explain which behavior you expected to see instead** and why.
* **Explain why this enhancement would be useful**

> #### Local development

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Local Development
```

### apps

This part of the package contains connectors to the various tools that we integrate with. An app interface can be a wrapper for an external tool like Trailblazer (`tb`) or be implemented completely in `cg` like `lims`. It's very important that the code stays confined to each individual tool. The Housekeeper connector _cannot_ directly talk to Trailblazer for example - such communication has to go through a `meta` module.

We also try to group all app-related imports and functionality in these interfaces. You shouldn't import e.g. a function from Scout from any other place than its app interface. This way, it's easier to overview if an update to an external package will affect the rest of the system.

#### coverage

Interface to [Chanjo][chanjo]. It's used to load coverage information from Sambamba output.

#### invoice

Internal app for working with invoices of groups of samples or pools.

#### lims

> Internal app for interfacing with the Clarity LIMS API. We use the `genologics` Python API as far as possible. Some actions are not supported, however, and then we fall back to using the official XML-based REST API directly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Internal app for interfacing with the Clarity LIMS API. We use the `genologics` Python API as much as possible. Some actions are not supported, however, and then we fall back to using the official XML-based REST API directly.
```

#### tb

Interface to Trailblazer.

- One responsibility is to define the set of files from MIP to store (in Housekeeper)
- Also used to interact with the pipeline for starting it

#### gt

Interface to Genotype. For uploading results from the pipeline about genotypes to compare and validate that we are clear of sample mix-ups.

#### hk

Interface to Housekeeper. For storing files from analysis runs and FASTQ files from demultiplexing.

#### loqus

Interface to LoqusDB. For loading observation counts from the analysis output.

#### osticket

Internal app for opening tickets in SupportSystems. We use this mainly to link a ticket with the opening of an order for new samples/analyses.

#### scoutapi

Interface to Scout. For uploading analysis results to Scout. It's also used to access the generation of gene panels files used in the analysis pipeline.

#### stats

Interface to CGStats. Used to handle things related to flowcells:

- this is where we find out how many reads a sample have been sequened
- getting paths to FASTQ files for samples/flowcells

> ### `cli`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### cli
```

```bash
cg transfer lims --status received
```

And similarly for filling in the delivery date:

```bash
cg transfer lims --status delivered
```

Another common task is to transfer data and FASTQ files from the demux/cgstats interface when a demultiplexing task completes. This is as easy as determining the flowcell of interest and running:

```bash
cg transfer flowcell HGF2KBCXX
```

The command will update the _total_ read counts of each sample and check against the application for the sample if it has been fully sequenced. It will also make sure to link the related FASTQ files to Housekeeper. You can run the command over and over - only additional information will be updated.

#### upload

Much like the group of analysis subcommands you can perform an upload of analysis results (stored in Housekeeper) all at once by running:

```bash
cg upload --family raredragon
```

All analyses that are marked as completed will be uploaded this way automatically:

```bash
cg upload auto
```

You can of course specify which upload you want to do yourself as well:

```bash
cg upload [coverage|genotypes|observations|scout|beacon] raredragon
```

> ### `meta`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### meta
```

> This is the interfaces that bridge various apps. An example would be the "orders" module. When placing orders we need to coordinate information/actions between the apps: `lims`, `status`, and `osticket`. It also provides some additional functionality such as setting up the basis for the orders API and which fields are required for different order types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is the interface that bridge various apps. An example is the "orders" module. When placing orders we need to coordinate information/actions between the apps: `lims`, `status`, and `osticket`. It also provides some additional functionality such as setting up the basis for the orders API and which fields are required for different order types.
```

#### orders

Includes: `lims`, `status`, `osticket`

The API exposes a single endpoint for submitting a batch of new samples/external samples for analysis. It handles a mix of updates to existing samples with entierly new ones. The API is designed to work well in a REST API context.

The interface supports:

- samples for sequencing + analysis (**scout**)
- samples for sequencing only (**fastq**)
- sequencing of ready-made libraries (**rml**)
- analysis of externally sequenced samples (**external**)
- sequencing and analysis of microbial whole genomes (**microbial**)

It opens a ticket using the `osticket` API for each order which it links with the ticket number. It stores information in both LIMS and `status` for samples and pools linked by LIMS id. It stores only a minimum of information about each sample in LIMS. Most of the critial information is stored in `status` and this is also the primary place to go if we need to update e.g. application tag for a sample.

> #### transfer

Reviewer 3: There is 2 transfer headers. We should rename one

This interface has a few related roles:

> ##### flowcell

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##### Flowcell
```

Includes: `stats`, `hk`, `status`

The API accepts the name of a flowcell which will be looked up in `stats`. For all samples on the flowcell it will:

> 1. check if the quality (Q30) is good enough to include the sequencing results.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Check if the quality (Q30) is good enough to include the sequencing results
```
Same rest of paragraph

1. update the number of reads that the sample has been sequenced _overall_ and match this with the requirement given by the application.
1. accordingly, the interface will look up FASTQ files and store them using `hk`.
1. if a sample has sufficient number of reads, the `sequenced_at` date will be filled in (`status`) according to the sequencing date of the most recent flowcell.

> ##### lims

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##### Lims
```

Includes: `status`, `lims`

Some info if primarily stored in LIMS and needs to be syncronized over to `status`. This is the case for both the date when a samples was received and when it was finally delivered. This interface is intended to run continously as part of a crontab job.

> #### upload

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Upload
```

> ##### beacon

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##### Beacon
```

Includes: `beacon`, `hk`, `scout`, `status`

This command is used to upload variants from affected subject/s of a family to a beacon of genetic variants.

> The API will first use `status` to fetch the id of any affected subject from a given family. It will then use `hk` to retrieve a VCF file from the analyses. A temporary VCF file is then created by filtering for variants present in desired gene panel(s) (retrieved using `scout`). The `beacon` app will finally handle the upload to beacon.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The API will first use `status` to fetch the ID of any affected subject from a given family. It will then use `hk` to retrieve a VCF file from the analyses. A temporary VCF file is then created by filtering for variants present in desired gene panel(s) (retrieved using `scout`). The `beacon` app will finally handle the upload to beacon.
```

The required parameters for the upload are:
- gene panel to use

> - id of the family

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- family ID
```

> ##### coverage

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##### Coverage
```

Includes: `status`, `hk`, `coverage`

> The API will fetch information about an analysis like name and id of the family and related samples from `status`. It will get the Sambamba output from `hk` and use the `coverage` app interface to upload the data to Chanjo for each individual sample.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The API will fetch information about an analysis like name and family ID and related samples from `status`. It will get the Sambamba output from `hk` and use the `coverage` app interface to upload the data to Chanjo for each individual sample.
```

> ##### gt

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##### Gt
```

Includes: `status`, `hk`, `tb`, `gt`

Given an analysis, the API will fetch information about the family. It will fetch the gBCF + qcmetrics files from `hk`. It will parse the qcmetrics file using `tb` to find out the predicted sex of each sample. It will then upload the results to Genotype. Subsequent upload of the same samples will overwrite existing information while logging the event.

> ##### observations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##### Observations
```

Includes: `status`, `hk`, `loqus`

Given an analysis record, it will fetch required files from `hk` and upload the variants to the observation cound database using `loqus`. This only works for families with at least one affected individual.

> ##### scoutapi

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##### Scoutapi
```

Includes: `status`, `hk`, `scoutapi`

Given the analysis record it will generate a Scout config file using information from `status`. It will use the "meta/analysis" API to convert the default panels for the family to the corresponding set of panels used to run the analysis. It will fetch all related VCF files and others from `hk`. Finally it will use the config to upload the resuls to Scout. The `scoutapi` interface will figure out if there's an existing analysis that needs to be replaced.

> #### analysis

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Analysis
```

Includes: `status`, `tb`, `hk`, `scoutapi`, `lims`

Starting an analysis requires complex interactions of many individual tools:

> - the config/pedigree is almost entirely generated from info in `status`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The config/pedigree is almost entirely generated from info in `status`
```
Same rest of paragraph

- the FASTQ files are fetched for each sample in the family from `hk` and renamed and placed in the correct location using `tb`
- the analysis is finally started using `tb`

We need to keep track of running analyses so we don't start the same family twice. This status is maintained by the "action" field in `status` which can be used to control when to start runs:

- **[EMPTY]**: the empty state will trigger an automatic start of the analysis when all related samples have been sequenced AND no previous analysis of the family has occured
- **analyze**: to re-run an analysis of a family you just need to set the field to "analyze" and it will start regardless if a previous analysis has completed
- **running**: this state will be maintained after a successful start of a family until it has completed. If the analysis fails you need to manually make sure to restart it OR set the field to "analyze".
- **hold**: this state will make sure that the family is excluded from any automated starts, however, it will not affect/warn when you start an analysis of the family manually

You update the status via the admin interface of the server.

> #### invoice

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Invoice
```

Includes: `status`, `lims`

> The creation of an invoice is initiated in LIMS. You then use the process id to parse out which samples should be part of the invoice. This process is setup to be run when a button is clicked in LIMS but can be run externally from any server with access to LIMS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The creation of an invoice is initiated in LIMS. You then use the process ID to parse out which samples should be part of the invoice. This process is setup to be run when a button is clicked in LIMS but can be run externally from any server with access to LIMS.
```

The invoice itself will be stored in an intermediate state in `status` while links will be created in LIMS to be able to keep track of which samples was part of which invoice.

> ### `server`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### `Server`
```

The REST API server handles a number of actions. It's written in [Flask][flask] and exposes an admin interface for quickly editing information in the backend MySQL database. The admin interface is served under a hidden route but the plan is to move it to Google OAuth.

The API is protected by JSON Web Tokens generated by Google OAuth. It authorizes access using the user table in the database.

#### Order endpoint

The `/order/<type>` endpoint accepts orders for new samples. If you supply a JSON document on the expected format, a new order is opened in `status` and LIMS.

> ### `store`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### `Store`
```
